---
layout: post
title: Your Privacy is at Risk and Not Enough People Care
tags: news opinions
published: false
---

In a few weeks, the world has been thrown into chaos.  Or not. Things have been this way for years but only recently has the can of worms been revealed on such a massive scale.

If you're wondering what I'm talking about, the Internet is up in arms about the _whistleblower_ Edward Snowden, former National Security Agency (NSA) emplyee who is now, as of this writing, on the run from the United States Government (USG).  What is a whistleblower?  A person who calls foul play by a governing body to reveal that we need to keep that governing body to stop abusing power.

Snowden is the hot news of the past few weeks, you could almost make an espionage movie out of the events.  Snowden revealed to the general public of the NSA and their PRISM program, which Snowden describes as improbably scary.  As I understand it, Snowden says PRISM can break encryption to just about any commercial internet communication.  I think that's unlikely but it is true that the NSA has a great deal of power.

Soon after, corporations such as _Google_ and _Facebook_ revealed that the NSA has requested data on large amounts of people.  _Skype_, before being bought from _Microsoft_, had a few developers work for the NSA developing a backdoor for _Skype_, so that the NSA can listen to your conversations.

As we can see, the NSA has a huge amount of power in these corporations that the public trusts.  How many of you reading this now have a _Facebook_ account?  You share your events, you tell everyone where you are going or pictures of places you've been.  You share your daily life and it gets saved on _Facebook_'s servers.  Almost everything you've posted onto the internet is saved somewhere.  And the NSA wants it.

There's an argument, "I have nothing to hide".  This is complete rubbish, everyone has something to hide.  Even if you actually had nothing to hide, you probably have family members or acquaintances that do.  Are you sure everyone you've come into contact don't have something to hide?  Maybe one of your friends are Muslim, or another friend of yours participated in a protest for a good cause.  What if they are under surveillance, and now you're linked to them?  The NSA makes some bold claims, for better or for worse.  They claim to have help foil multiple terrorist plots, which I don't think they have a concrete number for because it kept raising every time they mentioned it.  The NSA claims that it only reads _metadata_.  They claim they cannot and do not listen to US citizen's conversations.

Those are dubious claims.  Metadata is the data that you don't really think about: where the e-mail came from, what time it was sent, how long a conversation was.  It's not the _contents_ of the conversation but metadata definitely can tell a person's habits.  Maybe you call your significant other from work at noon, everyday through Skype.  It doesn't really matter what's inside sometimes when you can see if someone is acting differently than usual.

And how to tell if someone is not a US citizen?  What if you have a long distance call, while on vacation?  Then are you still 'protected' by your laws?  What if you are using a pay phone (unlikely, I know)?  Then how can one tell that you aren't plotting to your accomplices?  You can't.  It makes no sense to.

The can of worms only grows.  Multiple other governments are also doing this.  The USG makes bold claims that, by the reveal of the PRISM, are hard to believe.  It's hard to know who is telling the truth now.  That's scary, not being able to trust your government when that is what you should expect from a first world, democratic country.  But now that government is putting itself above the law.  And we're letting it happen.

You **should** care about your privacy.  What can we do?  The first step is to be aware what is happening, and not to forget about it.   Start caring about your privacy and don't make everything so public for anyone to read.  Privacy settings on _Facebook_ doesn't make it more private.  Encrypt some of your data, even if NSA threatens to keep and read your data, they will probably read it anyways if it was unencrypted.
